Adding analysis in BERD as news-item (#3134)
galaxyproject/galaxy-hub: content/news/25_05_20_Berd_WF/index.md

---

> title: Analysing data from BERD Data Portal with Galaxy

Reviewer: Do we want to label it as PoC?

Author: Ah, I see what you mean, sure, we can. 
```suggestion
title: Exploring data from BERD Data Portal with Galaxy
```

Author: what do you think of this? I don't mind not using analysing - but Proof of concept is something I never used before I came here, so I am unsure if its common in SSH

date: '2025-05-20'
tease: "Find out how to research your Data from the BERD Data Portal directly in Galaxy"
continent: EU
contact: Daniela Schneider
gtn: false
tags: [news]
subsites: [all]
---
In April, we included the [Berd4NFDI](https://www.berd-nfdi.de/about/) data portal in [Galaxy](https://galaxyproject.org/news/2025-04-09-berd-integration/). 
BERD is a NFDI consortium working towards a platform for collecting, (pre-)processing, analysing and preserving Business, Economic and Related Data. 

> Their data portal is a hub for sharing suitable datasets.

Author: ```suggestion
Their data portal is a hub for sharing suitable datasets. 
In this post, we showcase how you can make use of the content in Galaxy. 
We will demonstrate how to import data from BERD, do some data cleaning and wrangling and plot a word cloud and a geo map to see what content featured prominently and what popular locations of posts were.
```

## Getting started in Galaxy

> To analyse BERD data directly in Galaxy, go to the [Galaxy platform](https://usegalaxy.eu/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To analyse BERD data directly in Galaxy, go to the [European Galaxy server](https://usegalaxy.eu/). 
```

On the left pane, click on the "Upload" button. In the new window, click on the button 'Choose from repository'. 
In the opening window, insert "BERD" in the search bar. Now you can click on the folder "BERD@NFDI Repository". 
The datasets from BERD's portal show up here. You can select any folder to see its content. 
To choose one, click on the item or items you want to work with and click on the 'Select' button in the corner. Click on 'Start' and close this window.

> We worked with "Instagram Posts from German Parties" and clicked it to upload the CSV file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We worked with "Instagram Posts from German Parties" imported the CSV file to Galaxy.
```

## Example Analysis

> The [dataset](https://berd-platform.de/records/nghbn-9gx74) "Instagram Posts from German Parties" is particularly insightful as the file contains posts from 632 of the 1134 people standing for election in the Bavarian state election.  

Reviewer: insightful? or interesting?

```suggestion
The [dataset](https://berd-platform.de/records/nghbn-9gx74) "Instagram Posts from German Parties" is particularly insightful as the file contains posts from 632 of the 1134 people standing for election in the Bavarian state election - so be warned conservative content ahead ;)  
```

Author: I meant insightful and it gives unprecedented insights, but I don't mind changing this ;)

Since the data is messy, we first open it in the interactive environment of Open Refine, directly from Galaxy. 

![Screenshot of the BERD  example file in Open Refine on Galaxy](content/news/25_05_20_Berd_WF/SC_Galaxy_OpenRefine.png "Example file in Open Refine on Galaxy")
You can adapt the data in OpenRefine according to your needs. In the next step, we export the file out of the interactive environment, back to the Galaxy platform.
There, you can add further analysis, like removing line breaks with Regular Expressions. 
In this example, we were interested in two things: the most prevalent themes of the posts and where they originated.

> Therefore, we first cut out only the posts from the table, cleaned the content from stopwords and made a word cloud.

Reviewer: maybe move this sentence up at the very beginning? In this PoC we will demonstrate how you can use data from BERD, do some data cleaning and wrangling and plot a wordcloud and a geo map ....

### Visualising the posts

![Word cloud of party posts](content/news/25_05_20_Berd_WF/BerdWC.png "Word cloud created in Galaxy based on BERD dataset")

> As expected, the first glimpse suggests Bayer (Bavaria) and the CSU, the ruling party in Bavaria, feature as prominent topics. 

Reviewer: Bayer?

> As expected, the first glimpse suggests Bayer (Bavaria) and the CSU, the ruling party in Bavaria, feature as prominent topics. 

Author: ```suggestion
As expected, the first glimpse suggests "Bayern" (Bavaria) and the CSU, the ruling party in Bavaria, feature as prominent topics. 
```
